.. ----------------------------------------------------------------
   SUNDIALS Copyright Start
   Copyright (c) 2002-2023, Lawrence Livermore National Security
   and Southern Methodist University.
   All rights reserved.

   See the top-level LICENSE and NOTICE files for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
   SUNDIALS Copyright End
   ----------------------------------------------------------------

.. _CVODES.Organization:

*****************
Code Organization
*****************

.. ifconfig:: package_name != 'super'

   .. include:: ../../../shared/SundialsOrganization.rst


.. _CVODES.Organization.CVODES:

CVODES organization
===================

The CVODES package is written in ANSI C. The following summarizes
the basic structure of the package, although knowledge of this structure
is not necessary for its use.

The overall organization of the CVODES package is shown in
:numref:`CVODES.Organization.CVODES.Figure`. The basic elements of the structure are a
module for the basic integration algorithm (including forward sensitivity
analysis), a module for adjoint sensitivity analysis, and support for the
solution of nonlinear and linear systems that arise in the case of a stiff
system.

.. _CVODES.Organization.CVODES.Figure:
.. figure:: /figs/cvodes/cvsorg.png
   :align: center

   Overall structure diagram of the CVODES package. Modules
   specific to CVODES begin with “CV” (CVLS, CVNLS, CVDIAG,
   CVBBDPRE, and CVBANDPRE), all other items correspond to generic
   SUNDIALS vector, matrix, and solver modules.

The central integration module, implemented in the files ``CVODES.h``,
``cvode_impl.h``, and ``CVODES.c``, deals with the evaluation of integration
coefficients, estimation of local error, selection of stepsize and order, and
interpolation to user output points, among other issues.

CVODES utilizes generic linear and nonlinear solver modules defined by the
``SUNLinearSolver`` API (see Chapter :numref:`SUNLinSol`) and
``SUNNonlinearSolver`` API (see Chapter :numref:`SUNNonlinSol`),
respectively. As such, CVODES has no knowledge of the method being used to solve
the linear and nonlinear systems that arise. For any given user problem, there
exists a single nonlinear solver interface and, if necessary, one of the linear
system solver interfaces is specified, and invoked as needed during the
integration.

In addition, if forward sensitivity analysis is turned on, the main module will
integrate the forward sensitivity equations simultaneously with the original
IVP. The sensitivity variables may be included in the local error control
mechanism of the main integrator. CVODES provides three different strategies for
dealing with the correction stage for the sensitivity variables:
``CV_SIMULTANEOUS``, ``CV_STAGGERED`` and ``CV_STAGGERED1`` (see
:numref:`CVODES.Mathematics.FSA` and
:numref:`CVODES.Usage.FSA.user_callable.sensi_malloc`). The CVODES package
includes an algorithm for the approximation of the sensitivity equations
right-hand sides by difference quotients, but the user has the option of
supplying these right-hand sides directly.

The adjoint sensitivity module (file ``cvodea.c``) provides the infrastructure
needed for the backward integration of any system of ODEs which depends on the
solution of the original IVP, in particular the adjoint system and any
quadratures required in evaluating the gradient of the objective functional.
This module deals with the setup of the checkpoints, the interpolation of the
forward solution during the backward integration, and the backward integration
of the adjoint equations.

At present, the package includes two linear solver interfaces. The primary
linear solver interface, CVLS, supports both direct and iterative linear solvers
built using the generic ``SUNLinearSolver`` API (see Chapter :numref:`SUNLinSol`).
These solvers may utilize a ``SUNMatrix`` object (see
Chapter :numref:`SUNMatrix`) for storing Jacobian information, or
they may be matrix-free. Since CVODES can operate on any valid
``SUNLinearSolver`` implementation, the set of linear solver modules available
to CVODES will expand as new ``SUNLinearSolver`` modules are developed.

Additionally, CVODES includes the *diagonal* linear solver interface, CVDIAG,
that creates an internally generated diagonal approximation to the Jacobian.

For users employing :ref:`SUNMATRIX_DENSE <SUNMatrix.Dense>` or
:ref:`SUNMATRIX_BAND <SUNMatrix.Band>` Jacobian matrices, CVODES includes
algorithms for their approximation through difference quotients, although the
user also has the option of supplying a routine to compute the Jacobian (or an
approximation to it) directly. This user-supplied routine is required when using
sparse or user-supplied Jacobian matrices.

For users employing matrix-free iterative linear solvers, CVODES includes an
algorithm for the approximation by difference quotients of the product
:math:`Mv`. Again, the user has the option of providing routines for this
operation, in two phases: setup (preprocessing of Jacobian data) and
multiplication.

For preconditioned iterative methods, the preconditioning must be supplied by
the user, again in two phases: setup and solve. While there is no default choice
of preconditioner analogous to the difference-quotient approximation in the
direct case, the references :cite:p:`BrHi:89,Byr:92`, together with the example
and demonstration programs included with CVODES, offer considerable assistance
in building preconditioners.

CVODES’ linear solver interface consists of four primary phases, devoted to (1)
memory allocation and initialization, (2) setup of the matrix data involved, (3)
solution of the system, and (4) freeing of memory. The setup and solution phases
are separate because the evaluation of Jacobians and preconditioners is done
only periodically during the integration, and only as required to achieve
convergence.

CVODES also provides two preconditioner modules, for use with any of the Krylov
iterative linear solvers. The first one, CVBANDPRE, is intended to be used with
``NVECTOR_SERIAL``, ``NVECTOR_OPENMP`` or ``NVECTOR_PTHREADS`` and provides a
banded difference-quotient Jacobian-based preconditioner, with corresponding
setup and solve routines. The second preconditioner module, CVBBDPRE, works in
conjunction with ``NVECTOR_PARALLEL`` and generates a preconditioner that is a
block-diagonal matrix with each block being a banded matrix.

All state information used by CVODES to solve a given problem is saved in a
structure, and a pointer to that structure is returned to the user. There is no
global data in the CVODES package, and so, in this respect, it is reentrant.
State information specific to the linear solver is saved in a separate
structure, a pointer to which resides in the CVODES memory structure. The
reentrancy of CVODES was motivated by the anticipated multicomputer extension,
but is also essential in a uniprocessor setting where two or more problems are
solved by intermixed calls to the package from within a single user program.
